Some Mechanisms Related to Interest Development

AGENTS

Child/Youth
Each begins with a level of interest in a particular cluster of science topics (e.g., “astronomy”).
When a child/youth has an interaction in a science activity, their interest level changes.

Peers
When friends are participants in an activity, the value to interest increases (below the interest threshold).
When no friends are participants in an activity, the value to interest decreases (below the interest threshold).
Above the interest threshold, children/youth have a certain probability of making friends with others in the activity.

Parents/Caregivers
When parents are participants in an activity, the value to interest increases.
When no parents are participants in an activity, the value to interest decreases.
When parents actively broker access to activities to allow children to pursue interest, value to interest increases. 

Unrelated Adults
Unrelated adults are associated with interactions in activities; each has an arbitrary level of expertise and passion in the topic of that activity.
There are some arbitrary fixed number of unrelated adults available for interactions in the community.
When unrelated adults are skilled at sharing their expertise and passion in a topic in an activity, the value to interest increases.
When unrelated adults are skilled at sharing expertise but not passion in a topic in an activity, the value to interest stays the same (unless the interest threshold has been exceeded, then it increases).
When unrelated adults are skilled at sharing passion but not expertise in a topic in an activity, the value to interest stays the same.
When unrelated adults are neither skilled nor passionate, the value to interest decreases.

Web resource
Web resources vary in their fit to interest and expertise level of youth.
Web resources that are a good fit to both increase interest.
Web resources that are a poor fit to both decrease interest. 
Relative to interactions with people, 

INTERACTIONS
Interactions among agents take place within science activities.
Activities can take place in physical spaces or online.
Interactions include the child/youth, and they can also include parents, peers, and unrelated adults. Or, interactions can be with the self, interacting with a web-based resource.
There are school interactions and non-school interactions.
School interactions with unrelated adults in science activity are a weekly occurrence. 
Up to a certain age (say 10-11), interactions in non-school science activity depend on access determined by parents.
Beyond age 10-11 but below a certain threshold of interest, non-school interactions are random, and dependent on available activities in the community.
Beyond age 10-11 and above a certain threshold of interest, non-school interactions can be pursued by the self (occur more than chance), but are still dependent on available activities in the community.

ENVIRONMENTS
Children/youth live in a particular place and have a spatial zone of weekly activity within which most of their activities occur.
The environment has a fixed number of potential science activities that are located in particular places.
School is a place where children have regular (weekly) interactions with science activities.
Occasionally, children/youth venture out of this zone to pursue science-related activities (e.g., zoo, science museum).
The spatial distance of non-school science activities from the child matter: the farther away from home, the less likely to pursue (all other things being equal).

